An induction generator or asynchronous generator is a type of alternating current (AC) electrical generator that uses the principles of induction motors to produce electric power. Induction generators operate by mechanically turning their rotors faster than synchronous speed. A regular AC induction motor usually can be used as a generator, without any internal modifications. Because they can recover energy with relatively simple controls, induction generators are useful in applications such as mini hydro power plants, wind turbines, or in reducing high-pressure gas streams to lower pressure.

An induction generator draws reactive excitation current from an external source. Induction generators have an AC rotor and cannot bootstrap using residual magnetization to black start a de-energized distribution system as synchronous machines do. Power factor correcting capacitors can be added externally to neutralize a constant amount of the variable reactive excitation current. After starting, an induction generator can use a capacitor bank to produce reactive excitation current, but the isolated power system’s voltage and frequency are not self-regulating and destabilize readily.

An induction generator produces electrical power when its rotor is turned faster than the synchronous speed. For a four-pole motor (two pairs of poles on stator) powered by a 60 Hz source, the synchronous speed is 1800 rotations per minute (rpm) and 1500 RPM powered at 50Hz. The motor always turns slightly slower than the synchronous speed. The difference between synchronous and operating speed is called "slip" and is often expressed as per cent of the synchronous speed. For example, a motor operating at 1450 RPM that has a synchronous speed of 1500 RPM is running at a slip of +3.3%.

In operation as a motor, the stator flux rotation is at the synchronous speed, which is faster than the rotor speed. This causes the stator flux to cycle at the slip frequency inducing rotor current through the mutual inductance between the stator and rotor. The induced current create a rotor flux with magnetic polarity opposite to the stator. In this way, the rotor is dragged along behind stator flux, with the currents in the rotor induced at the slip frequency. The motor runs at the speed where the induced rotor current gives rise to torque equal to the shaft load.

In generator operation, a prime mover (turbine or engine) drives the rotor above the synchronous speed (negative slip). The stator flux induces current in the rotor, but the opposing rotor flux is now cutting the stator coils, a current is induced in the stator coils 270° behind the magnetizing current, in phase with magnetizing voltage. The motor delivers real (in-phase) power to the power system.

In induction generators, the reactive power required to establish the air gap magnetic flux is provided by a capacitor bank connected to the machine in case of stand-alone system and in case of grid connection it draws reactive power from the grid to maintain its air gap flux. For a grid-connected system, frequency and voltage at the machine will be dictated by the electric grid, since it is very small compared to the whole system. For stand-alone systems, frequency and voltage are complex function of machine parameters, capacitance used for excitation, and load value and type.

An induction generator connected to a capacitor system can generate sufficient reactive power to operate on its own. When the load current exceeds the capability of the generator to supply both magnetization reactive power and load power the generator will immediately cease to produce power. In other wording: the slip (s) from negative "slides" into zero (0) and this sets the induction machine "at the brink" to exit the generator mode and ready to enter the motor mode.Further the "positivization" of slip (s) drives the induction asynchronous machine into the motor mode. Consequence: power flow switches direction (sense!): induction machine consumes power form gird instead of delivering it.The load must be removed and the induction generator restarted with either a external DC motor, or if present, residual magnetism in the core.

Induction generators are particularly suitable for wind generating stations as in this case speed is always a variable factor. Unlike synchronous motors, induction generators are load-dependent and cannot be used alone for grid frequency control.
